chronic sleep deprivation has
system-wide effects sleep affects every
organ system and every disease state
let's be very clear here cancer cells
multiply
faster the more sleep-deprived you are
[Music]
as in any sprint if you're an athlete
running a quarter mile
you're going to need recovery after that
a lot of
successful people especially listening
to the things that you're putting out
there
have a success ritual in the morning but
a great morning starts the night before
when people are depressed or bipolar or
anxiety or fear or trauma or ptsd
it is stressed and they cannot break the
look
i tell you we found the key to break the
loop
that's where i am right now with the
summons
to get to sleep we need to get cold to
stay asleep we need to stay cold and to
wake up we need to warm up
[Music]
you don't actually get stronger when
you're sprinting you get stronger when
you recover
[Music]
what do you guys do to be more efficient
in your sleep
a very consistent bedtime i go to bed at
midnight i wake up at 6
17 whether i like it or not i stop
caffeine by 2 pm
every single day i stop alcohol roughly
3 hours before bed if i'm drinking i'm
not
that big of a drinker to be fair i don't
exercise in the evenings i usually
exercise based on my chronotype
um around 10 30 11 o'clock in the
mornings and that actually helps me out
quite a bit
and then when i wake up in the mornings
i get 15 minutes of sunlight and i drink
a bottle of water
that's what i do and it works i tell
people all the time i think i'm the only
sleep doctor in the universe that says
it's okay to fall asleep with the
television on
that's interesting i've got people who
need to watch the simpsons to fall
asleep
that's just what they need to do it's
amazing if you turn it off they're up
all night
like it doesn't make any sense why would
i recommend them to stop doing something
that's
effectively working for them and by the
way having a television on in your room
in the evening there's these things
called television timers they're built
into 99
of televisions today set the [__]
timer and go to bed
so um when it comes to
rebalancing through nature right
i heard you talk about this and i
thought that it was really interesting
so i'm not a forest bather i'm far
more of a city bather my idea of like
the
i can finally relax would be in tokyo um
but i actually do get the whole notion
of getting in rhythm
with absolutely nature what do you have
people do and i'd really like to hear
about the nature rebalancing
so there was a great study that was done
they took
20 insomniacs they brought them into the
woods kept them there for two weeks lo
and behold at the end of the two weeks
almost none of them had insomnia anymore
right so there's lots of different ideas
as to what helped what hurt things like
that
i would argue that the lack of
external crazy stimulation lights on
cars noises all of that was helpful
but i think they just entrained
themselves to the sun going up in the
sun going down i mean let's be fair
very little insomnia ever occurred
before the electric light bulb
okay so if edison did anything he [__]
up people's sleep
forever because there's all these other
things that you can now do because we
have the presence of light
consistently in the evenings and so
in training yourself to the natural
cycle would be great but let's be fair
people aren't walking into the woods for
two or three weeks to fix their sleep so
then
what can we do along the way and how do
we help these people with insomnia
the biggest problem is between your ears
right every single
patient that i talk to they say dr bruce
i can't turn off my brain
right that's not a surrounding problem
that doesn't have anything with blue
light
that has to do with our inability to
slow down
deal with stress so things like
cognitive behavioral therapy are highly
effective for these people
so cognitive behavioral therapy is a two
component process for insomnia so
we know that insomnia is what we call
psychophysiologic insomnia so psycho
being
something going on in the head
physiology in the body so what we do is
we create
schedules for people when should you go
to bed and when should you wake up
and that's part one of the therapy and
to be fair we
actually restrict their sleep you would
like that because you don't like sleep
right and so what we do is we tell them
if you normally go to bed at 11 and you
don't fall asleep until one don't get in
bed until one
because all you're going to do is lie
there and be pissed off anyway right so
we restrict their sleep we build up
their sleep deprivation
on purpose because we want that natural
sleep deprivation to help them
fall asleep and stay asleep if that
doesn't work then we go to the cognitive
portion
the cognitive portion is what do you
think about sleep a lot of people say
well if i don't get eight hours it's
gonna peel
you know years off the back end of my
life there's no data to show that
none so what i do is we take all these
dysfunctional thoughts
and we ask the patient what are you
thinking about sleep and we get them to
rate them and then we give them the
facts
90 of the time they just don't know the
facts right it's my job
to educate as many people as i possibly
can about what sleep
really is
what we know obviously has been the rise
of sleep difficulties in society
and that has been matched by
unfortunately a rise in
pharmacology and particularly sleeping
pills and i say unfortunately
not because i'm anti-medication and i
know a lot of people who work at these
pharmaceutical companies and they're
good people great scientists wanting to
do good things but unfortunately
sleeping pills
are largely blunt instruments and they
don't produce naturalistic sleep
they're in a class of drugs that we call
the sedative hypnotics
and when we take sleeping pills we
mistake
sedation for sleep but it's not natural
sleep
and in fact sleeping pills have been
associated with a significantly higher
risk of death
as well as cancer so much so that in
2016 the american college of physicians
made a landmark recommended
intervention they said that sleeping
pills must no longer be the first line
treatment for
insomnia instead the american college of
physicians said
it has to be cognitive behavioral
therapy for insomnia
that must be the first line recommended
treatment
for those sleep problems and so
cognitive behavioral therapy
in general really tries to target two
things
cognitive and behavioral and so the
cognitive aspects for
insomnia are aspects where we try to
correct your beliefs or your
misbeliefs around sleep and some of your
ideas around sleep
some of those things that can be either
inappropriate incorrect
or just triggering anxiety or worry so
we try to
modify those cognitions those beliefs
but then we also look at what you're
doing in your life
the different behaviors that you're
doing or things that you're not doing
and try to correct the behaviors as well
for example
how's your caffeine intake how's your
alcohol intake uh what time are you
going to bed what time are you waking up
what's your chronotype
are you a morning type evening type are
you sleeping in harmony with your
chronotype
or against your chronotype um
are you getting daylight in the morning
are you getting too much daylight at
light at night artificial light at night
do you exercise
and so we change behaviors and we change
thought patterns and together cognitive
behavioral therapy for insomnia
is just as effective as sleeping pills
in the short term
but what's great is that when you stop
working with that clinician
or your online program and i should say
that i
um i work with a company i'm an advisor
to a company called chuni
um it's s h u n
i dot i o if people want to go and
explore it
and you can get cognitive behavioral
therapy online there
but you work with your therapist and
after about
five or six sessions you can continue
that benefit
of improved sleep for up to five years
the studies have demonstrated now
whereas with
sleeping pills when you stop their use
then not only do you go back to the bad
sleep that you behave you are having
you typically go back to even worse
sleep it's called rebound insomnia
and now you have to go back onto the use
so you become
dependent there is an addiction
dependency cycle
so that's really what cbti is
and that's really the best approach for
sleeping uh problems right now
all right so i have two sleeping
problems
one is that there are times where i will
get
um either really stressed or i'll get
really excited and i have a very easy
time falling asleep but then i'll wake
up after three or four hours
and i find it very difficult to fall
back asleep
and then the second part just so i don't
forget is sleep inertia in the morning
but what can i do to optimize
for staying asleep
yes so there it's a case of trying to
deal with that
sort of downgrade the activation of the
nervous system the reason that people
typically wake up
uh in the middle of the night and can't
get back to sleep not always but often
is because they have this sort of stress
reliever carrying this anxiety
and anxiety biologically is the
principal
mechanism that we think underlies most
insomnia
and what happens in part is that the
fight-or-flight branch of the nervous
system
becomes overactive and that's exactly
why does it shut down like i find it so
easy to fall asleep
but i can tell on the nights where i'm
going to wake up
it just seems weird but then my
subconscious mind kicks it back alive
yeah why why would it be that way and
the reason is because after about 16
hours of wakefulness you've built up a
lot of that healthy sleepiness what we
call sleep
pressure and the longer that you're
awake the more of that sleep pressure
builds up
and it's a chemical that builds up in
the brain called adenosine
and then when we go into sleep it's the
time when the brain can actually start
to clear out that adenosine
and it's so it starts to lower the sleep
pressure
and after about eight hours of sleep
you've cleared away
16 hours of that adenosine of that
sleepiness
and so you wake up naturally and you
feel refreshed and restored
but what will happen is that you can be
stressed and sort of or excited
but the sleeping the weight of
sleepiness pulling you down is so heavy
at that point that you can get to sleep
but then three or four hours later
you've jettisoned maybe 50 of all of
that adenosine maybe even more because
it principally happens during deep sleep
and so now your brain is much more
vulnerable to those awakenings because
it doesn't have the weight of that
sleepiness does that make some sense it
makes total sense and it makes me want
to punch myself
back to sleep it's so obnoxious
well because the benefits or i should
say the
the damage that you do by not getting
sleep
is so terrifying that every time i wake
up i'm like
come on like you know how much better
you will perform if you just sleep and i
am not one of those guys that's like
hey you gotta grind in four hours sleep
i'm like if i need nine hours of sleep i
want to get nine hours of sleep
every single night forever until the end
of time so
it's just always super nice if you're
hoisting that flag i will salute it and
i definitely
you know not everyone but certainly in
the type a
sort of particularly business culture
maybe there is this sort of sleep
machismo attitude where people were
there
lack of sleep like a badge of honor um
but you're right it's it's foolhardy for
a number of reasons
but let me come back to that issue of
you know beating ourselves up because
we need to have some degree of self
compassion when it comes to sleep
you know i am not invulnerable to sleep
problems myself i've had bouts of
insomnia throughout my life to be
completely
transparent and open with you um and
everyone every one of us is gonna have a
bad night of sleep it's not unusual
don't worry don't stress you know back
when i was starting to write the book it
took me about four years to write it
in 2014 you know sleep was sort of the
neglected stepsister in the health
conversation
of that time and i was so saddened by
the sickness and the disease and the
suffering that was happening because of
a lack of sleep
you know i came out you know all guns
blazing
and i think that that was important but
for those people who were struggling
with sleep those people who had sleep
problems with insomnia
you know the book kind of felt almost as
though it was you know
sleep or else dot dot dot um
and i didn't mean it to be that way so i
want to say
right now because i've learned to soften
and become a much
better appreciator of these conditions
just like you described
if you wake up and you can't get back to
sleep don't worry
just realize tonight is not my night
it's not the end of the world
i'm still going to be able to function
somewhat tomorrow
don't stay in bed awake for too long
though
that's the important message here
because it's very tricky
i'm super curious to see what you think
about yes
because i know where you're going right
yeah you're training yourself that being
in bed is
is being awake is okay while you're in
bed so that's right i used to get up
and whether i slept for two hours three
hours whatever if i couldn't fall back
asleep in like 15 minutes i'd get out of
bed
and i would go to work and start doing
my thing
and then i would go lay back down and
sleep and sometimes i'd fall asleep for
you know two or three more hours but the
number of times i would wake up with a
headache after that
was just too much so i was way
frustrated and i'm like all right
there's got to be something else
so what i found is if i put an audio
book on dude i will be back asleep in
like 10 or 15 minutes it's
crazy and the only thing that wakes me
up is the fact that i have
headphones in my ears or if they start
yelling in the book or something like
that which always pisses me off uh
but it puts me back to sleep so reliably
it's crazy that's great that's exactly
what we recommend so
don't go to work don't start checking
emails don't eat because it trains the
brain to expect food but instead in a
dim
room somewhere different so you change
the context so you're changing the
learned association
just read a book listen to an audio book
meditate in dim light all of these
things are great find out whatever works
for you
and then only when you're sleepy do you
return to bed and there's no time limit
for that
and that way you train the brain back
out of a bad association that it's
learned which is
my bed is this place of being awake
which if you repeat that over time
you become trained to be awake in the
bed
and then you will relearn the
association that your bed is the place
where you're asleep
so you're 100 right that's exactly what
we recommend
to your second question which is sleep
inertia it's a real thing
sleep inertia is typically where we wake
up and
your brain requires some time to kind of
warm up to operating temperature
like an old vintage car you know you
can't just turn the engine on
and start you know flooring it and going
up to redline
you need to sort of circulate the fluids
and warm the oil up and get the engine
warm
and then you can really start to push it
it's the same way with our brain in some
ways
now different people have different
severities of sleep inertia
i'm actually like you i suffer from
quite bad sleep inertia
you know for the first hour you know my
partnership
when i come through in the morning she
wakes up a little bit earlier than me
you know she kind of knows that i can
say look honey i am
not the best version of myself in the
first hour
i i know that i may have done something
bad yesterday and
we should talk about it and i want to
resolve that but
can we not do it in the first hour
because i'm not the best version
so firstly accepting that it's normal
and it's real
the second thing though however is you
can
sleep inertia typically happens in very
severe amounts if you're
mismatched between your sleep schedule
and your
chronotype schedule and so
you can go on um and you can go online
and type google
and morningness eveningness questioner
and it's a questionnaire that you fill
out and it figures out what your
chronotype is are you
a morning type somewhere in between or
are you an evening type
and what we find is that morning types
when they wake up
in the morning at their normal time
which is very early or
early they don't have sleep inertia
they're good to go they can
jump into the gym and they're like
energizer bunnies and they're all happy
and
you know joyful and to me i'm just like
oh you know
whereas evening types waking up at the
time that
morning types have to wake up which is
in some ways the way society is designed
society is desperately biased against
evening types
and wrongfully so because it's not your
fault it's genetically determined
there are about six or seven genes that
we know right now that dictate
what your chronotype is it's not your
fault it's gifted to you at birth
um you don't get to choose now if you
are suffering from sleep inertia what
we find is that if you can sleep a
little bit
later into the morning go to bed maybe a
little bit later sleep later
play around with that and see if the
speed with which you wake up
is better that your sleep inertia is
less
that's one way it may not always work
another way is temperature
now it turns out that when people have a
cup of coffee they say look
i just need like five minutes and i i
swig a couple of
you know mouthfuls of coffee and now i'm
alert that's nonsense
caffeine doesn't actually get into your
system until about 12 to 15
minutes so if you're feeling any effects
of caffeine before that
it's not the caffeine it turns out that
when we go to sleep we drop off our core
body temperature
we get very cold we become almost
hypothermic
now to wake up we have to warm up
so to to get to sleep we need to get
cold
to stay asleep we need to stay cold and
to wake up we need to warm up and so one
way that you can
artificially accelerate or try
accelerating
your inertia in a quicker dissipating
manner
is to try to warm up more quickly so get
a hot drink in the morning doesn't have
to be caffeine if that's not
your thing i don't drink caffeine but
i'm not against it
caffeine is an issue it's not really the
dose that makes the poison it's the
timing
that makes the poison when it comes to
sleep and caffeine which we can come on
to but
drink a hot drink get your body
temperature up
if you like if you've got a smart
thermostat program it to start to rise
temperature in your bedroom or in the
house in the last hour before your alarm
and you can it can really start to help
you wake up and then play around with
these smart lights i have one where it
sort of
starts to bring me out of sleep about
five minutes before my alarm
that can help but the data is not good
on that the data on temperature
much better i hope you guys enjoyed this
episode brought to you by our sponsors
at athletic greens to receive a free
one-year supply of vitamin d and five
free travel packs with your first
purchase visit athleticgreens.com
impact theory enjoy the episode
sleep is individual and the biggest
thing that i want people to remember is
sleep is healing
that's what our body does in sleep it
heals physically and it heals mentally
so it's it's interesting to me that you
hate sleep
because it's the thing that's going to
get you the furthest
and the longest yeah so the my
relationship with sleep goes like this i
prioritize it
it is the most important thing for me to
get in terms of my wellness schedule my
wellness regime
okay the one thing i don't [__] with
sleep which is why i don't set an alarm
do i wish that nature in its infinite
wisdom mr mckeon
do i wish that it had figured out
something through evolution so that we
didn't need it yes
do i admire the dolphins for sleeping
one hemisphere at a time
yes do i recognize that being tired is a
unique form of torture
yes so i have no interest in sleep
deprivation
i don't get it i make sure i get my
sleep
my thing is much like we've been talking
about here with sleep efficiency i
believe in
you know the that if you shorten the
amount of time that you sleep you will
become less efficient and you will
actually get less
done than you would just by clocking the
hours getting the sleep that you need
and moving forward but i do think also
about longevity and so
if there is something to look cleaning
the glymphatic system
it just takes a certain number of hours
and you need to do it
and that's just that because i do worry
in my own life
that i am betraying this is a true
statement
i am betraying myself and my desire to
live forever by the way i live my life
which is at
a thousand miles an hour every day but
it's going to be a u-shaped curve in it
in a way you know
so there's the benefit actually doesn't
go on and on forever so
sleep yeah well there's two well let's
say increasing or decreasing your sleep
there's going to be an optimal point
so you know your conflict is you want
more hours in your day because you want
to do
really great things but you can't do
really great things if you're tired and
you do need a certain amount of sleep so
yes you can peel it back
so so what we're you know i think it's
quite clear we're not saying you must
get ers
right you should try and find the
optimum amount for you
if that shortens it down and you six
hours is great for you well then you
have an extra two hours in your day
if you then keep pushing and pushing and
pushing and go down to like four
hours those two hours are not going to
be your best performance and it's
probably going to actually affect the
other hours in the day
so there's a benefit where you can come
down but at some point you just can't
keep scraping off hours and hours and
hours
really incredible to watch you be so
mission driven
and mission focused um and i want to
talk about
that at a high level the notion of
really optimizing yourself because you
have a
it's very atypical notion of
optimization versus the just grind it
out work your face off
kind of mentality where'd that come from
well i think it's really a pragmatic
approach
you know i think you can always get in
that super
grind mode that that real push that
sprint to get things done
but as in any sprint if you're an
athlete running a
you know quarter mile you're gonna need
recovery after that
you know and i think that's something
that we can sometimes fail to recognize
that
you don't actually get stronger when
you're sprinting you get stronger when
you recover
and i think the psyche is just the same
as the body in that we perform best when
we have periods where we push and then
periods where we
reflect integrate recover and so for me
it's just been listening to what works
for me
you know i can continue to grind and
continue to perform worse and worse and
worse
or i can take the opportunities when i'm
inspired and push really hard
and then take those next phases to
recover
adapt and try and come back the next
time and sprint even faster sprint even
farther but
it's just finding that balance that's
really effective for me to get what i
need to get done
and how do you find that like is there
an internal
uh self-awareness that you've cultivated
or
yeah there's like a natural sense to
find
balance and i think we all have that i
think we know it we just override that
voice we're like oh
more coffee or oh more something else to
hide the signals that our body is
naturally telling us like our body is
constantly giving us
clues but the problem is it comes with a
whisper and we can
drown out that whisper in a million
different ways with distraction with
you know mental processes with you know
physical things like
like i said drinking coffee or taking
adderall or doing whatever you need to
do to drown out that sound that says hey
really you need to sleep you know like
that's really what your body is asking
for
and so i think it's really just tuning
in to what you need and being able to
listen to that voice
and not only hear it but follow through
on what it says
if you had to put a really fine point on
what
you think optimization should be when
somebody hears you
talking about that what should they take
away from it
well it's ultimately the principle that
you know you want to be a little bit
better
in some way tomorrow than you are today
but it's not going to be in a linear
path
again these go through cycles of stress
and recovery
so it's just kind of being able to surf
the flow of that
and know again it really comes down to
balance so it's the practices
like you need to know what to do for
sure and then you need to know
how to apply those things in the right
way so
when you when to push and when to take
the pressure off the gas as well
and i think that's really understanding
that so part of it is the knowledge
and then part of it is the follow
through and then part of it is the
discipline
to know not only when you need to go but
when you need to rest
what are things then that people can do
to actually optimize
their sleep yeah this is what it's
really all about
you know i like to start with the low
hanging fruit first
and something really really fascinating
is just simply
changing or embracing the time of day
that you exercise
can improve your sleep quality and so
appalachian state university did a
really cool study
and they wanted to see what time of day
exercising at
various times of day how does it impact
your sleep quality and so they had
the study participants to exercise
exclusively at 7 a.m
and another phase exclusively at 1 pm in
the afternoon another phase exclusively
at 7 pm in the evening
they compiled all the data and at the
end of the study they found that morning
exercisers
spend more time in the deepest most
anabolic stages of sleep so they're
producing more human growth hormone
they have more efficient sleep cycles
what we've been talking about
they also tend to sleep longer and this
is the one that
kind of can get glanced past on average
they had about a 25 percent greater drop
in blood pressure at night
so what's what's up with that that's
correlated with a deactivation
of your sympathetic fight-or-flight
nervous system right
so you're actually able to shift gears
get to that parasympathetic rest and
digest
calming down by getting some exercise in
in the morning
and so how do we employ this though
that's the question because some
people's just like you know i can't
exercise in the morning
and there's also people who exercise in
the morning who might have
terrible sleep and it's because this is
not like the magic bullet this is a
thing to stack in your condition
if you're doing this and then messing up
the one i'm gonna talk about next
you're probably not gonna have the best
sleep so here's how to employ this just
five minutes and i tested this each
morning i do this five minutes of
exercise
you know it might be just jumping on a
rebounder you know a little mini
trampoline for five minutes
go for a quick power walk uh do some
tabata which is just four minutes
and a little mobility work and i guess
most people don't know what tabata is
high intensity interval training
basically is 20 seconds of exercise
followed by 10 seconds of rest
repeated over and over again for four
minutes and
in his clinical studies this was found
to outperform
you know traditional cardio like the
kind of moderate intensity
45 minutes of exercise in four minutes
wow
the change in your cardiovascular
benefits body composition
and also changing your mitochondria as
well this is why it works it does
something called a cortisol reset
all right we talked about cortisol but
again it's a good thing
if it's in the right time and the right
amount clinically i would call these
people tired and wire that would come in
i'm looking at the hormone panels
and the cortisol will be really low in
the morning and high at night
thus they have sleep problems so you
naturally if your
heart if your cortisol was on a natural
hormone rhythm it would be elevated at
its peak in the morning right around
6 a.m to 8 a.m and then gradually
decline as the day goes does that have
to do with what time you wake up
sort of i mean the cortisol will kind of
tend to nudge you out of sleep
but also we'll tend to notice that as
the day as it
your sleep goes on it becomes lighter
and lighter anyways
right this is when you tend to remember
your dreams like at the at the
end of the sleep and so getting this
little boost
like helping your body to propel and get
your cortisol up via exercise helps to
reset that rhythm
and get you back on track so that's why
it works so that's number one
low hanging fruit just get in five
minutes of exercise start
in the morning no matter what just five
minutes is all you need
it's gonna help to create this snowball
effect of
good things for you you know five
minutes if this is the time you do go to
the gym and do your full workout so be
it all good but
everybody who's not already doing that
just get that five minutes in
the second one and this one is more of
the tough love
and the most difficult but this is the
most important one in our culture today
and this has to do with our tech all
right so harvard researchers have
confirmed that
blue light exposure from our favorite
devices you know ipads or iphones
androids tablets televisions they do in
fact
suppress your melatonin substantially
because it your body essentially thinks
the sun's out is that the problem
so we have photoreceptors that are
always trying to gauge what time it is
right because our bodies are wired up to
be in sync with nature
but only recently like literally just
the past few decades have we been able
to manipulate and basically create a
second day time
right so your body's just it doesn't
really know how to figure it out
and so the blue and white spectrum
specifically are the ones that
are more similar to daylight and so what
it's doing is and so here's what the
researchers found basically
every hour you're on your device at
night suppresses melatonin for about 30
minutes
all right so if you're on your you know
you watch a movie a three hour movie for
example
your melatonin is going to be suppressed
even you go to bed right after you're
not producing adequate melatonin for
about an hour and a half
and so again you can be unconscious from
sheer physical exhaustion but you're not
going to go through your sleep cycles
efficiently
and so just be mindful of that what i
encourage people to do is to give
yourself a screen curfew
just 30 minutes all right i don't want
to make this complicated
just 30 minutes but here's the rub
we're addicted to our devices like
straight up we just need to be honest
i am we all are you know basically it's
because of
this dopamine loop right dopamine is so
powerful so interesting dopamine is one
of the things i truly feel
has helped to create our civilization as
it is because it drives us
to seek right dopamine drives us
to to seek and and to grow and to find
to discover
the internet is perfect for manipulating
this because
every time you look for something you
find something especially social media
you seek fine seek fine you produce the
dopamine it drives you to look
but why do you keep going is every time
you find something you get a little bit
of a hit from your opioid system
like it's like this slow drip i have
morphine and so it starts to like feel
really good
and to the point where you might be
doing your work and like you've got a
deadline
and you're just you know like i'll check
instagram real quick before you know
it's like
30 minutes later you fall into the
internet black hole
just like it just pulls you in so be
aware of that i'm not saying again
our connection with tech is just going
to grow so i'm not bashing that
it's just be aware of it and that when
you try to
abide by this principle which will
really really help your sleep quality
to give yourself a screen curfew you
can't just sit there and twiddle your
thumbs
because you'll get what i call the
internet jitters right you'll start
getting like
um a little bit of a withdrawal effect
like
let me just check one this one one post
what we have to do is this you have to
replace it with something of greater or
equal value
it's really that simple hopefully this
is what i encourage people to do
this is an opportunity to connect right
connect with your
significant other your kids the people
like physical like have a real
conversation with somebody
right i know it sounds crazy but it
really works it's really really good
and also this is a great opportunity if
you you know if you're in a relationship
or not whatever you're into you could
you know
uh utilize and i've got a chapter on
this as well intimate time
because there's a big connection between
sex and sleep and there's also a big
connection between
sleep and sex and how it impacts your
sex life
and so when we have an orgasm for
example we produce a chemical
i'm sorry cocktail of chemicals
including oxytocin
norepinephrine prolactin and oxytocin
for example has been found clinically to
basically combat the effects of cortisol
and
hopefully sex is more interesting than
instagram
but you know i don't know it depends on
how you're doing it and so
that's what i want people to do a screen
curfew and or use these hacks utilize
some blue light block
blockers and so for your desktops
laptops things like that you get an app
called flux
that pulls out the most troublesome
sleep sucking spectrum of light from
your screen it basically cools your
screen off
and it's a simple app you set it and
forget it's totally free
just go to dr google type in f.l.u.x
and a couple clicks and it's on your
device i've been using it for maybe five
or six years i love it
and uh for your uh telephone you know
your
cell phone we've got on the iphones
built in now
is night shift with androids the best
one
out there uh from my research is one
called twilight
you know so there's options for
everybody then what about the ambient
light at night or if you're watching the
movie
again i don't want to get don't get too
neurotic about it but if this is a
problem for you and you're not sleeping
as well as you could be
or your results your body composition
not changing you're not getting that
blood pressure down
you're not having that focus you need
through the day um then you might want
to address this but
another little hack is to get some blue
light blocking glasses the first ones i
had was straight up like
i just built the birdhouse but now
there's some really cool stylish ones
that you can rock
as a matter of fact you'll create a
neural association when you put the
glasses on
and you'll start to get sleepy you know
it's nuts
and that is another thing right there is
to create an evening ritual right your
brain is always looking for
patterns a lot of successful people
especially listening to
the things that you're putting out there
have a success ritual in the morning
but a great morning starts the night
before
you know a truly great morning and so
a couple of quick things people can do
is the thermal regulation piece
turn down your thermostat all right now
this one's again this is going to hit a
pressure point for some people but
according to research between
62 and 68 degrees fahrenheit is ideal
for sleep and so for some people it's
going to sound a little bit frosty but
lowering the
thermostat a little bit can have
incredible benefit
uh for your sleep but this doesn't mean
you can't use your covers and put on
some warm socks that kind of thing
so cooling off this thermostat um
making sure that your bedroom ideally i
call it a sleep sanctuary
and so that when you walk into your
bedroom at night if your brain has a
neural association when i go into my
bedroom i'm watching television or i'm
working
those channels are going to fire because
of the myelin getting laid down over the
years
of you doing that behavior or even
months it can get laid down
and so you might have the intention of
going to bed but if your tv is in there
your brain is going to be firing
expecting to watch television and parts
of your brain will be waking up in a way
and so i encourage people to get the
tech out of your room
have your sleep have your bedroom be a
sleep sanctuary you know or
some place that's just for the the
double s which is sleep and sex
here's also a really interesting reason
why there's an italian study done
they found that couples who have a
television in their bedroom have 50 less
sex
really yeah yeah that's interesting and
you know this is a little bit more
middle-aged little past middle-aged the
people in the study but and i know some
people like that's not true i have sex
all the time
you probably do it in a snowstorm like
it doesn't matter where you are like
you're a
human rabbit it doesn't matter but for
other people it's like
a distraction right it's a distraction
and it can also you know create all of
those kind of chemical soup
issues that we've been talking about
with elevating cortisol and those kind
of things so
i ideally get your television out of the
room uh
the other tech and last thing with the
sleep environment i'll share
when i talked about melatonin those two
conditions biological night
and you also need a dark environment and
so if you're in an environment where
you're maybe in a
suburban or city environment where
there's like neighbors porch lights
coming in
there's leds outside cars coming up and
down the street
as crazy as this sounds that that small
amount of light where we're now dubbing
light pollution
can have a significant impact on your
sleep quality and here's here's why we
know this
cornell university i think did the best
study on this and they took a test
subject and had them sleep in an
otherwise dark room and they took a
a light a fiber optic cable and a light
the size of a quarter and put it behind
their knee
and that was enough to disrupt their
sleep cycle
because your skin also has
photoreceptors that is sending
information to your brain your nervous
system your internal organs to try to
tell your body
what time it is is trying to figure it
out you know so we want to get rid of
that
artificial light exposure now does this
mean moonlight and stars no humans have
evolved with those things and their lux
like i actually put a lux chart
in the book it's so small compared to
even the weakest fluorescent bulbs
and so get yourself some blackout
curtains if that external light is an
issue
internal light you know your alarm
clocks and
you know light you know lamps you know
some people still are sleeping with
their lights on and things like that
be mindful of that and also what you can
do is just change the bulb color
you know if you still have issues with
the dark which some adults do and that's
okay
um you can change the bulb cover
color and i actually had some nasa
scientists or people that work with them
to send me some different bulbs because
folks in space they don't have that
biological clock
and so they would experience all these
different health challenges
they had to try to figure it out they
knew that it was an issue with their
sleep
and so they start to give them different
bulbs for different times of
day in a way you know even though
they're in outer space
so it's really cool what you can do with
these little hacks but bottom line is
you want to have a dark cycle
so you can produce melatonin and you
know those are just a few
those are just a few of the different
things people can do
everybody knows that if you're stressed
out take a deep breath
well don't take one deep breath take six
and this is something i talk about a lot
the research from a japanese study shows
that six deep breaths
are what it takes to actually create
state change so start practicing that
you get flustered you get emotional
don't take a breath just take six use
that mental override
to take six damn breaths and really
start to
unplug from that and then use use the
cold
you know use the cold as an ally use
that to
practice mental override use that to
reduce inflammation use that practice i
think that's something that's really
important
making sure you stay hydrated i talk
about the morning mineral cocktail
i think a lot of us we go from caffeine
to
all these different other substances and
foods and whatever and a lot of us are
running chronic dehydration and not only
dehydration from water but the minerals
and electrolytes that you need so
adding in some sea salt or some
himalayan salt in with your water
is going to be effective i wake up every
morning 16 ounces of water himalayan sea
salt
about 3 grams of that and a splash of
lemon
that's something that's really important
finding some way
to practice mindfulness so finding that
way to get to mental stillness
i think is really important knowing your
body enough to know
all right this is what happens when i
have a bunch of sugar you know
i feel good for the second then the
insulin kicks in and then i go
hyperglycemic then i feel exhausted and
then i reach for more coffee like
you got to have insight into those
cycles and understand what's going to be
best for you
and knowing knowing yourself with
training knowing what movement patterns
help knowing how your body feels and
reacts
you know getting your head and your ego
out of your sex life so it can be a way
to really
engage with your partner in a way that
creates deeper connection and
allows you to be mindful be present you
know be in the big now
sleeping taking naps you know i think
that's one thing that a lot of people
miss
they think that you have to get all your
sleep overnight in this
uninterrupted eight hours so good luck i
don't know anybody who gets
uninterrupted eight hours
maybe one or two people but for most of
us you know we're going to get what we
can at night but then
feel free to take a nap or what nick
little hill in his book sleep calls a
controlled recovery period 30 minutes
where you just kind of zone out and
allow yourself
to recover and then of course on the on
the other side
it's a lot of the other things we talked
about but ultimately you know trust that
you got to forgive yourself you know
forgive yourself for everything that's
happened in the past
understand that you're not the same
person that you were then you're the
person that's learned from all those
things you know heraclitus has a quote
no man steps in the same river twice for
he's not the same river
it's not the same river and he's not the
same man you know we're we're different
at any different moment and we can
decide to be different we can decide to
have listened to this
and change something or change
everything or change whatever we have
that ability we have way more power
than we recognize and what people will
tell us that we have
so stepping into that power and deciding
for ourselves
what we want to do with it when people
are depressed
or bipolar or anxiety or fear or trauma
or ptsd
it is stressed and they cannot break the
loop
i tell you we found the key to break the
that's where i am right now with the
signs
and now this needs to be implemented for
those
in need and there are many many
in need your neurology is inside
that and it connects with your body the
way nature matters to be
and in the primordial state of our cells
the cells should be protected by
proteins
but because of our comfort zone behavior
they are
inactive does the inflammatory in
impulses
through the transcription factors just
little [__]
it will go into the cell and they begin
to mess
up the telomeres the longevity
the cell division the condition thereof
and we live shorter
and better so less and we are
becoming vulnerable for the wrong genome
expressions and that causes diseases
yeah this is really interesting if this
is really um shaking down to hormesis
which said another way is a little bit
of bad does you a lot of good
yeah and so you actually need something
that stresses the system in a way that
most people would think of as
bad yeah it actually ends up being good
and this is where
um i i'm jarred in the best way possible
with what you were saying about it being
this meditative experience for you
because i think of going in ice is
brutally painful of requiring all of my
discipline
and desire to battle through and i
i wouldn't have thought of it as being
something that i have to relax
into of you know really sort of
releasing
letting go relaxing almost removing
myself
from the certainly removing myself from
the suffering of the pain
but i'm curious are you when you're
doing this and you've talked about
dipping under the ice and going into
this meditative state and you've
described it with these sound effects
which i always found really interesting
but when you're going
into that do you feel the pain and
divorce yourself from the suffering or
do you literally not feel
any discomfort you feel anything but
you learn to let go you follow the
breath
and thus the hormonal system the
endocrine system
which we have shown in scientific
research
is really active within your command
and with that comes the adrenaline the
epinephrine the opiates and the
cannabinoids
all right now they are very strong have
a really
they're really strong painkillers as
well yes right yes so that's
interesting so you're saying you're
actually killing the pain by tapping
into that system because you've kicked
off all this
neuropharmacology basically yes okay
that's
super interesting what i want to know is
when you're
going into the meditative state you know
you've just been injected
with um the endotoxins yes
what are you visualizing like what are
you actually thinking when you're trying
to get to adrenaline or bone marrow or
i tell you um if you go into the ice
you're really not thinking about your
mortgage
or your wife or this or that you're not
going to picnic
you feel the focus will be on your
feeling
how to get this feeling into adaptation
and to overcome whatever is coming
and it goes directly and i i tell you
the the cult has been my teacher i just
followed the teacher
the feeling learned to let
go intuitively i felt i want to do this
i did yoga i did kung fu did all kinds
of
things and and uh great
but the cold is really
merciless but righteous and i was
ready to go in i felt intuitively
i want to go in because it has got
something i don't know what it is
and yes i went in and i felt it the
connection was there
beyond any word and that's what i was
looking for just tapping into deeper
parts
of the brain feeling pure energy
feeling power innate capacitated power
we have to deal with that i was looking
for that
and since then i went on and on and on
and on
i did all these records and many more
challenges
i did crazy stuff really sitting all the
night in in your shorts outside in
freezing
temperatures and feel great that is
something
that is power and i've been venturing
and discovering more and more
and finally i began to realize but it's
all in the mind
oh yes so learning to let go in the
right way
following your breath the breath is able
to prime the body
and then your mind the neurology of the
mind
if i'm able to make my skin temperature
not going down
while being exposed to ice cold water
skin temperature that's power and that
power
is the same power we can learn to
embrace
and awaken in which we are able
to tackle any stressor in the world
any stressor emotionally and physically
and mentally
whatever you come up we are built to be
able
to oppose that to get through and to
learn
and not to be afraid because we have the
power
of the mind
i would argue that um ambien is gonna
have a really big competitor
um it's called weed and it's out
and it's recreational in a couple of
states i live in you know california
and it's very very interesting do you
smoke
sure interesting absolutely what do you
find that it does to your sleep
so it depends on when you smoke it what
you smoke and how much you smoke
so it's all there's a lot of different
things out there but i've written
extensively
about if you're going to use marijuana
to help you sleep what should you look
for
i've also i've also broken down the
cannabinoids so a lot of people out
there are talking about cbd
cbd cbd right let me be clear you'd have
to have almost 200 milligrams of cbd to
have any effect on sleep
much lower dosage to help with pain you
want cbn
okay cbn which turns out to be oxidized
thc
helps with sleep much more at least
that's what the data would suggest
so how does one oxidize thc you let
weed lie around for a little while and
it's basically cbn is old weed
now to be fair people are learning how
to process it and make that process move
quicker
but what we're starting to see is now
we're starting to see cannabis like if
you go into a cannabis dispensary and
you say what have you got for sleep
they have a section right like when
people my age 50
51 years old are walking into a
dispensary we're not going there to get
high
we're going there because we got pain we
have sleep issues and we
want to use the medicine right that's
where the gold
is and so when you start to really look
at it like let's treat it like a
medicine
let's look at it in a way that can be
helpful i mean we have an entire
endocannabinoid system
in our body that isn't being used except
for with cannabinoids
so and also to be fair cannabinoids are
in many other things besides
marijuana but they're really in
marijuana so why shouldn't we start to
walk down that path
create that technology and help more
people all right so you've said that if
you're gonna drink alcohol stop three
hours before bed
what's the protocol with weed so i think
it's gonna be different and to be honest
with you i don't think i know yet
um it's definitely something that i'm
studying and i'm learning more
more and more about but i would argue
that the tinctures like the the liquid
that comes in the droppers that you can
do sublingually i would say that would
be a place to start i haven't heard of
that
oh you just drop it under your tongue
yeah you just take it drop it underneath
your tongue let it sit there
60 seconds swallow it close your eyes
one thing that is super
weird is things that during the day
are not in any way shape or form
intimidating or daunting
when i'm supposed to be sleeping so if i
wake up in the middle of the night i'll
start stressing about something and i'll
i'm literally like
once i get out of bed this is not going
to stress me out so why is it
stressing me out at night is there a
part of my brain that shuts off is there
a part of my brain that becomes active
like
why are things at night do they seem so
big and dramatic whereas in the day it's
like man
it's not a big deal yeah i
we actually don't really fully
understand in truth but part of this
is to do with context that it's dark
you don't have full awareness you don't
have
full functioning of the brain because
when we wake up that sleep inertia by
the way
in part is because your prefrontal
cortex which is the part of the brain
that makes us most human it's like the
ceo of the brain
it's very good at understanding high
level concepts putting things into
contextually appropriate boxes making
top down control decisions
it regulates our emotions that part of
the brain is the last thing to come back
online
as we wake up and that's why we're not
very you know brilliant
if we have sleep inertia but when we're
waking up out of sleep in the middle of
the night we also have some of that so
we don't have the rational logical part
of our brain
fully engaged plus the context is one
that's dark and so we don't have sort of
the daylight
sort of giving us this sort of normative
safe feeling
and so what happens is that the brain
starts to default
to rumination and catastrophization you
know it's almost like this rolodex of
anxiety that then starts to unfold
and that one memory that you know you
bring back into mind
um at that moment of waking up is the
finger that flicks the domino
on that cascade of you know rumination
so
again just realize i've done this before
i've experienced this before
i know that tomorrow by you know one or
two p.m in the afternoon i think about
this and i think
that was ridiculous to be worrying about
it's it's okay
try to remind yourself of that look at
what sleep you need and look about how
you can make that more efficient it is
the single most
in my opinion most important thing that
you could do easily
which will have a really positive impact
as we discussed in like
literally every organ in your body it
reduces your risks just of so many
comorbidities
for for someone who wants to be and a
lot of your listeners are going to try
and look at a high performance output
if you are not managing your sleep it is
crazy to think that you can run the
optimum efficiency
all right so i'll slightly change it for
you because i imagine your answer is
going to be something to do with sleep
if it is
what is the one thing people should do
that would have the biggest impact on
their sleep
know your chronotype without question
it's super easy go to chronoquiz.com
it's my website you'll learn in 30
questions
what your chrono type is and then you
can figure out
i mean in my book i tell people the best
time to have sex eat a cheeseburger ask
your boss for a raise and
sleep so it's useful in all facets of
life
nice it's a great place to leave you all
guys sleep man i'm telling you get it
it is the number one thing people are
always asking me
uh trying to accomplish as much as i'm
trying to accomplish if i
set an alarm in fact i stopped posting
about how early i wake up because people
were getting the wrong idea they thought
that i was setting alarm to wake up at
three which i do not
uh get your sleep and if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already
be sure to subscribe you're going to get
weekly videos on building a growth
mindset cultivating grit
and unlocking your full potential
you